Title: Identification and Characterization of Population-Wide Epigenetic Variation

Project Summary 
One of the grand challenges in biology today is the ability to link genotype to phenotype. Phenotypes are the 
basic form of traits of an organism. Phenotypes, in the form of diseases, can arise when mutations occur at 
certain loci. Recent advances in genomic technologies have enabled the scientific community to generate 
genotypic information for hundreds of species. Moreover, methods for linking genotype to phenotype using 
genome-wide association mapping are continuously improving. As a result of these two endeavors, the first 
landmark studies using this association-mapping technique from an entire range of organisms have surfaced. 
These studies demonstrate the power of combining genomics with population genetics for the study of 
phenotypic diversity. The ultimate goal of genome-wide association studies is to identify the casual genetic 
variant for a particular trait. While remarkable progress is being made in identifying some casual variants, 
many remain elusive. One possible source of naturally occurring casual variants that is currently being 
overlooked are epigenetic alleles (epialleles). These alleles often go undetected in a population because their 
defining signatures are not as obvious as a change in DNA sequence, like genetic mutations, which can easily 
be identified by sequencing-based technologies. Epialleles often contain changes in their DNA methylation 
status. Very few epialleles have been identified across kingdoms, which is likely a result of the difficulty in their 
identification. This proposal aims to use naturally occurring Arabidopsis thaliana strains that have been isolated 
from a broad range of geographically distributed regions of the planet for the identification of population-wide 
epialleles. The short-term goals of this proposal are to identify these unique alleles by whole-genome bisulfite 
sequencing technologies. Upon computational identification of these unique alleles, proposed experiments aim 
to understand their origins and their modes of inheritance, in addition to their impact on phenotypic variation. 
To accomplish these goals, the candidate will continue to learn computational biology methods as well as 
principles in quantitative genetics through collaboration with experts in these respective fields. The successful 
completion of this proposed work will reveal the degree of epiallelic variation within a species paving the way 
for extending these studies into human populations. This work will attempt to determine the basis for epiallelic 
variation using association-mapping techniques. This approach will allow the mapping of genomic regions that 
are linked to the presence of an epiallele. One major goal of this work is to determine the impact that epialleles 
identified by these high-throughput techniques have on phenotypic variation. Demonstrating that epialleles 
identified in this population actually contribute to the phenotype variation will be of utmost importance to 
increasing awareness of naturally occurring epialleles and their potential phenotypic consequences in human 
biology. Finally, successful training in genomics, computational biology and quantitative genetics will give me a 
strong foundation for beginning an independent research program focused on natural epigenetic variation.