Title: Immunologic Mechanisms and Rheumatic Diseases

PROGRAM SUMMARY/ABSTRACT
This continuation of an established program emphasizes the techniques and concepts of cell and molecular
biology, genetics, computational biology, developmental and bone biology, and fundamental studies in
immunology relevant to rheumatic, autoimmune and musculoskeletal diseases. Population-based clinical
research employs rigorous methodological design and statistical analysis. Support is requested for 6
postdoctoral trainees with an M.D., a Ph.D., or both, and 1 predoctoral (Ph.D. candidate) trainee. Faculty are
carefully selected and perform research in areas of I) Basic Research including: 1) Adaptive Immunity, 2) Innate
Immunity, 3) Bone Biology and 4) Computational Biology, and II) Translational and Clinical Research including
1) Animal Models of Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Diseases, 2) Human Immunology, Genomics and
Genetics, and 3) Patient-Centered Research in the Epidemiology and Outcomes of Rheumatic Diseases. While
the primary strength of the program resides in the direct and individual nature of the interaction between trainees
and responsible faculty members, substantial didactic experiences, the medical school and university
environments, along with a series of structured activities, foster interactions and supplement training. Trainees
audit semester courses at Harvard Medical School in their field of basic science, while population science
investigators obtain an MPH, Masters, or a similar degree at the Harvard Chan School of Public Health.
Postdoctoral trainees in a combined clinical and research training program join this program after completing
clinical training. Graduate students join the program only after completing course work and are in Harvard Ph.D.
programs in Biomedical and Biological Sciences including 1) Immunology and 2) Bioinformatics and Integrative
Genomics. The program is hosted in the Division of Rheumatology, Inflammation, and Immunity at Brigham and
Women’s Hospital. Importantly, approximately 40% of faculty are located in other divisions, departments and
Harvard Medical School-affiliated institutions and are selected for their relevance to the program goals and their
outstanding scientific and training expertise. In addition to Brigham and Women’s Hospital Departments of
Medicine, Orthopedics and Neurology, faculty are at 1) the Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, 2) Boston
Children’s Hospital, 3) Massachusetts General Hospital, 4) Harvard Medical School Departments of
Immunology, Biomedical Informatics, and Genetics, 5) Harvard School of Dental Medicine, 6) Harvard Chan
School of Public Health and 7) UMass Chan Medical School. The program goal is to provide an ongoing pipeline
of highly trained and expert investigators prepared for and focused in rheumatic and related musculoskeletal
research.