Title: Phosphoarginine-linked protein quality control and stress responses in mycobacteria

ABSTRACT
Antibiotics are a cornerstone of modern medicine, but antibiotic resistance threatens the effectiveness of our
existing antibacterial arsenal. This phenomenon poses an acute challenge with Mycobacterium tuberculosis, a
global pathogen that causes greater mortality than any other bacterium. Nearly half a million drug-resistant
tuberculosis infections occurred in 2021, driving an urgent clinical need to develop novel drugs against M.
tuberculosis and to rigorously characterize new molecular targets. One promising class of targets are the
mycobacterial Clp proteases, which carry out regulated degradation of cytosolic proteins. Although Clp proteases
are known to be essential, their cellular roles and the reasons for their essentiality are poorly understood, which
in turn constrains efforts to develop Clp-targeting therapeutics. This proposal investigates the connection
between arginine phosphorylation and the mycobacterial ClpC1P1P2 Clp protease. In the distantly related
species Bacillus subtilis, phosphoarginine (pArg) modifications occur on diverse proteins during proteotoxic
stress and are recognized by the ClpCP protease as a degradation signal. We recently reported that pArg
modifications also occur in mycobacteria, although the specific conditions that stimulate pArg installation appear
to be different than in B. subtilis. Preliminary studies confirm that pArg-bearing proteins are proteolyzed by
ClpC1P1P2. Additionally, we find that pArg binds ClpC2, a protein that contributes to antibiotic persistence. We
hypothesize that mycobacteria install pArg in response to stress or starvation; that pArg directs ClpC1P1P2
activity and modulates its assembly state; and that ClpC2 is a pArg-sensitive regulator of dormancy and
persistence. This proposal seeks to test this overarching hypothesis and interrogate key biochemical aspects of
pArg recognition. In Aim 1, we use phosphoproteomics to identify stress conditions that elevate pArg, assess
the requirement of pArg on mycobacterial stress tolerance, and identify mycobacterial arginine kinases and
phosphatases. In Aim 2, we use in vitro biochemical approaches to test the influence of pArg number and
substrate stability on proteolysis by ClpC1, and determine the influence of pArg binding on the ClpC1 activity
state. In Aim 3 we assess how pArg-dependent changes in ClpC2 oligomerization influence its function. The
outcomes of this proposal will include an expanded understanding of the roles of pArg in mycobacteria, new
mechanistic details of how pArg-bearing proteins interact with Clp proteases, and elucidation of the role of ClpC2
in pArg-sensing and persistence. These studies will lay the groundwork for future efforts to test the connection
between pArg and M. tuberculosis infection. Moreover, a detailed understanding of pArg-linked proteolytic
pathways will improve our ability to screen for new ClpC1-targeting therapeutic leads.